OSDOCS-17030 created GA release notes (#101444)
openshift/openshift-docs: security/external_secrets_operator/external-secrets-operator-release-notes.adoc

These release notes track the development of {external-secrets-operator-short}.

For more information, see xref:../../security/external_secrets_operator/index.adoc#external-secrets-operator-about[{external-secrets-operator-short} overview].

[id="external-secrets-operator-release-notes-1-0-0_{context}"]
== Release notes for {external-secrets-operator} 1.0.0 (General Availability)

Issued: 2025-11-03

> The following advisories are available for the {external-secrets-operator} 0.1.0:

Author: Done

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:13182[RHBA-2025:13182]
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:13134[RHBA-2025:13134]
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:13133[RHBA-2025:13133]

> Version 1.0.0 of the {external-secrets-operator} is based on the upstream external-secrets version v0.19.0. For more information, see thelink:https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/releases/tag/v0.19.0[external-secrets project release notes for v0.19.0].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version 1.0.0 of the {external-secrets-operator} is based on the upstream external-secrets version v0.19.0. For more information, see the link:https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/releases/tag/v0.19.0[external-secrets project release notes for v0.19.0].
```

Reviewer: The changes aren't reflecting, please have a look.

[id="external-secrets-operator-1-0-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]
=== Bug fixes

* Before this release, many of the APIs listed in the console for the {external-secrets-operator} were missing descriptions. With this release, the API descriptions have been added. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-61081[OCPBUGS-61081])

[id="external-secrets-operator-1-0-0-features-enhancements_{context}"]
=== New features and enhancements

*Renaming and improvements on the Operator API*

> With this release, the Operator API `externalsecrets.operator.openshift.io`` has been renamed to `externalsecretsconfigs.operator.openshift.io`` to avoid confusions with the external-secrets provided API that has the same name, but a different purpose. The API has also been restructured and new features are added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, the Operator API `externalsecrets.operator.openshift.io` has been renamed to `externalsecretsconfigs.operator.openshift.io` to avoid confusions with the external-secrets provided API that has the same name, but a different purpose. The API has also been restructured and new features are added.
```

For more information, see {external-secrets-operator} APIs.

> *Support to collect metrics of both operator and operands*

Reviewer: nit: Changed it from the initial input
```suggestion
*Support to collect metrics of External Secrets Operator components*
```

With this release, the {external-secrets-operator} supports collecting metrics for both the Operator and operands. This is optional and must be enabled.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For more information, see Monitoring the External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift.
```

Reviewer: The changes aren't reflecting, please have a look.

> *Support to configure proxy*

Author: Done

With this release, the {external-secrets-opeator} supports configuring proxy for both the Operator and operand.

For more information, see About the egress proxy for the {external-secrets-operator}.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Root filesystem is read-only for External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift containers*

With this release, to improve security, the External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift and all its operands have the readOnlyRootFilesystem security context set to true by default. This enhancement hardens the containers and prevents a potential attacker from modifying the contents of the container’s root file system.

*Network policy hardening is now available for External Secrets Operator components*

With this release, External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift includes pre-defined NetworkPolicy resources designed for enhanced security by governing ingress and egress traffic for operand components. These policies cover essential internal traffic, such as ingress to the metrics and webhook servers, and egress to the OpenShift API server and DNS server. Note that deployment of the NetworkPolicy is enabled by default and egress allow policies must be explicitly defined in the ExternalSecretsConfig custom resource for the external-secrets component to fetch secrets from external providers.

For more information, see Configuring Network Policy for the Operands.

```

For more information, see xref:../../security/external_secrets_operator/index.adoc#external-secrets-operator-about[{external-secrets-operator-short} overview].

[id="external-secrets-operator-release-notes-1-0-0_{context}"]
== Release notes for {external-secrets-operator} 1.0.0 (General Availability)

Issued: 2025-11-03

The following advisories are available for the {external-secrets-operator} 1.0.0:

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:19416[RHBA-2025:19416]
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:19417[RHBA-2025:19417]
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:19418[RHBA-2025:19418]
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:19463[RHBA-2025:19463]

> Version 1.0.0 of the {external-secrets-operator} is based on the upstream external-secrets version v0.19.0. For more information, see the link:https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/releases/tag/v0.19.0[external-secrets project release notes for v0.19.0].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version 1.0.0 of the {external-secrets-operator} is based on the upstream external-secrets project, version v0.19.0. For more information, see the link:https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/releases/tag/v0.19.0[external-secrets project release notes for v0.19.0].
```
imho

[id="external-secrets-operator-1-0-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]
=== Bug fixes

* Before this release, many of the APIs listed in the console for the {external-secrets-operator} were missing descriptions. With this release, the API descriptions have been added. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-61081[OCPBUGS-61081])

[id="external-secrets-operator-1-0-0-features-enhancements_{context}"]
=== New features and enhancements

*Renaming and improvements on the Operator API*

> With this release, the Operator API externalsecrets.operator.openshift.io has been renamed to externalsecretsconfigs.operator.openshift.io to avoid confusions with the external-secrets provided API that has the same name, but a different purpose. The API has also been restructured and new features are added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this release, the Operator API, `externalsecrets.operator.openshift.io` has been renamed to `externalsecretsconfigs.operator.openshift.io` to avoid confusion with the external-secrets provided API that has the same name, but a different purpose. The external-secrets provided API has also been restructured and new features are added.
```

Author: Done

For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html-single/security_and_compliance/index#external-secrets-operator-api[External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift APIs].

*Support to collect metrics of {external-secrets-operator-short}*

With this release, the {external-secrets-operator} supports collecting metrics for both the Operator and operands. This is optional and must be enabled.

For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html-single/security_and_compliance/index#external-secrets-monitoring[Monitoring the External Secrets Operator for Red Hat OpenShift].

*Support to configure proxy for {external-secrets-operator-short}*

> With this release, the {external-secrets-opeator} supports configuring proxy for both the Operator and operand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this release, the {external-secrets-operator} supports configuring proxy for both the Operator and operand.
```
misspelled, not rendered
